---
title: Questions for Multiple Paths In QUIC
abbrev: QUIC Multipath Questions
docname: draft-dawkins-quic-multipath-questions-00
date:
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: transport
workgroup: QUIC Working Group
keyword: Internet-Draft

coding: us-ascii
stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
  ins: S. Dawkins
  name: Spencer Dawkins
  organization: Tencent America
  role: editor
  email: spencerdawkins.ietf@gmail.com

informative:
  TS23501:
    author:
      - ins: 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project)
    title: Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects; System Architecture for the 5G System; Stage 2 (Release 16)
    date: 2019
    target: https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/23_series/23.501/

  I-D.ietf-quic-transport:
  I-D.ietf-quic-datagram:
  I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath:
  I-D.an-multipath-quic:
  I-D.an-multipath-quic-application-policy:
  I-D.huitema-quic-mpath-option:
  I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers:
  I-D.amend-iccrg-multipath-reordering:
  I-D.bonaventure-quic-atsss-overview:
  I-D.dawkins-quic-what-to-do-with-multipath:

  RFC0793:
  RFC8684:
  
  QUIC-charter:
    title: IETF QUIC Working Group Charter
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/quic/about/
  QUIC-interim-20-10:
    title: IETF QUIC Working Group Virtual Interim Meeting - October 2020
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/tree/master/interim-20-10
    date: October 2020
  QUIC-interim-20-10-minutes:
    title: IETF QUIC Working Group Virtual Interim Meeting - October 2020 - Minutes
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/tree/master/interim-20-10
    date: October 2020
  Chromium-Multipath:
    title: Multipath in Chromium
    author:
      - ins: Fan Yang/Jana Iyengar
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/blob/master/interim-20-10/Multipath%20in%20Chromium.pdf
    date: October 2020
  Apple-Multipath:
    title: Multipath transports at Apple
    author:
      - ins: Christoph Paasch
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/blob/master/interim-20-10/Multipath%20transports%20at%20Apple.pdf
    date: October 2020
  Alibaba-MPQUIC:
    title: MPQIIC Use Cases
    author:
      - ins: Yanmei Lei / Yunfei Ma
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/blob/master/interim-20-10/MPQUIC%20use%20cases.pdf
    date: October 2020
  Sat-Terr-Multipath:
    title: Satellite/Terrestrial Multipath Communication 
    author:
      - ins: Jörg Deutschmann
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/blob/master/interim-20-10/Satellite-terrestrial%20multipath%20communication.pdf
    date: October 2020
  Hybrid-Access-Multipath:
    title: Hybrid access networks and requirements on MPQUIC
    author:
      - ins: Olivier Bonaventure
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/blob/master/interim-20-10/Hybrid%20access%20networks%20and%20requirements%20on%20MPQUIC.pdf
    date: October 2020
  Multipath-3GPP-ATSSS:
    title: Multipath in 3GPP ATSSS
    author:
      - ins: Spencer Dawkins / Mirja Kühlewind / Florin Baboescu / Hannu Flinck
    target: https://github.com/quicwg/wg-materials/blob/master/interim-20-10/Multipath%20in%203GPP%20ATSSS.pdf
    date: October 2020
  Elephant-By-Touch:
    target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_men_and_an_elephant
    title: "Wikipedia Page for Blind men and an elephant"
    date: Retrieved December 2020
  Udana-6-4:
    target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blind_men_and_an_elephant
    title: "Udana 6:4 Sectarians (1) (Tittha Sutta)"
    date: Retrieved December 2020
    
--- abstract

The IETF QUIC working group has been chartered to produce extensions that would "enable ... multipath capabilities" since the working group was formed in 2016, but because multipath was an extension, work on multipath, and the other extensions named in the charter, waited while work proceeded on the core QUIC protocol specifications. 

After the QUIC working group chairs requested publication for the core QUIC protocol specifications, they scheduled a virtual interim meeting to understand the use cases that various groups inside and outside the IETF were envisioning for multipath with QUIC. 

As part of that discussion, it became obvious that people had a variety of ideas about how multiple paths would be used, because they weren't looking at the same use cases, and so had different assumptions about how QUIC might use multiple paths. 

This document is intended to capture that variety of ideas, to inform further discussion in the working group. 

--- middle

# Introduction {#intro}

The IETF QUIC working group has been chartered to produce extensions that would "enable ... multipath capabilities" ({{QUIC-charter}}) since the working group was formed in 2016, but because multipath was an extension, work on multipath, and the other extensions named in the charter, waited while work proceeded on the core QUIC protocol specifications ({{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} and related specifications). 

After the QUIC working group chairs requested publication for the core QUIC protocol specifications, they scheduled a virtual interim meeting ({{QUIC-interim-20-10}}) to understand the use cases that various groups inside and outside the IETF were envisioning for multipath with QUIC. 

As part of that discussion, it became obvious that people had a variety of ideas about how multiple paths would be used, because they weren't looking at the same use cases, and so had different assumptions about how QUIC might use multiple paths.

## A 2500-year Side Trip {#TouchTheElephant}

The story that might have been titled "The People Unable to See and the Elephant" {{Elephant-By-Touch}} in 2021, is from the Indian subcontinent, and is at least 2500 years old (it is recorded in the Buddhist text Udana 6.4 {{Udana-6-4}}). The story, which has spread widely throughout the world, is about people unable to see, who are brought before the king, and shown an elephant - but they only touched the part of the elephant they were each standing in front of, and then began to argue about what an elephant was like (in {{Udana-6-4}}. Their descriptions were that "an elephant is like" a jar, a basket, a plowshare, the pole of a plow, a granary, a post, a mortar, a pestle, or a broom.

None were completely wrong (they had their hands on the part of the elephant they were right about), but none were completely right, either (an elephant was more than the parts they hand their hands on). And the king pointed to the monks of different sects who had been arguing about the teachings of the Buddha, and said, "they keep on arguing, quarreling, and disputing, wounding one another with weapons of the mouth, saying, ‘The teaching is like this, it’s not like that. The teaching is not like that, it’s like this.’”

## Back to the Introduction

Let us turn our attention from "describing an elephant", to "describing what multiple paths in QUIC might mean", arising out of the QUIC working group virtual interim meeting minutes, at {{QUIC-interim-20-10-minutes}}, which include pointers to the video recording from the meeting, pointers to each presentation given, questions and answers after each presentation, and on discussion that continued following the cirtual interim meeting the QUIC working group mailing list.

## Other Voices

## Notes for Readers

It cannot be emphasized enough that multiple proposals for "QUIC multipath" have been submitted to the IETF (at a minimum, {{I-D.an-multipath-quic}}, {{I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath}}, and {{I-D.huitema-quic-mpath-option}}. In this document, "QUIC multipath" means only "QUIC using multiple paths", and draws from the discussion on the QUIC working group mailing list, some of which has been guided by one or more of the current proposals. 

This document is an informational Internet-Draft, not adopted by any IETF working group, and does not carry any special status within the IETF.

It reflects the author's understanding, and contributions that include improvements and clarifications are welcomed, as described in {{contrib}}. 

## Contribution and Discussion Venues for this draft. {#contrib}

(Note to RFC Editor - if this document ever reaches you, please remove this section)

This document is under development in the Github repository at https://github.com/SpencerDawkins/draft-dawkins-quic-multipath-questions.  Readers are invited to open issues and send pull requests with contributed text for this document, but since the document is intended to guide discussion for the QUIC working group, substantial discussion of this document should take place on the QUIC working group mailing list (quic@ietf.org). Subscription and archive details are at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/quic.

# Multipath Modes of Operation {#intro2sm}

For the purposes of this document, it's enough to consider two QUIC endpoints (QUIC Host X and QUIC Host Y) with two disjoint paths between them (Access Net A and Access Net B), as shown in {{fig-arch}}.

## Reference Architecture {#ref-arch}

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
               ------------                
              /            \               
     +-------| Access Net A |--+           
     |        \            /   |           
     |         ------------    |                        
 +---+--+                      |        +------+
 | QUIC |                      +--------| QUIC | 
 } Host |                               | Host |
 |  X   |                      +--------|  Y   |
 +---+--+                      |        +------+
     |         ------------    |
     |        /            \   |
     +-------| Access Net B |--+
              \            /
               ------------
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #fig-arch title="Simplified Reference Architecture for QUIC Multipath Operation"}

Some use cases limit themselves to two paths - for example, the use case described in {{I-D.bonaventure-quic-atsss-overview}} is limited to one 5G 3GPP access network and one non-3GPP access network. More than two paths are certainly possible - for example, two hosts that are connected by a satellite path, and two different landline paths from different network providers for redundancy. But I believe this simplified architecture is sufficient for discussion purposes. 

Please note: as mentioned in {{intro}}, some readers will be thinking of an end-to-end QUIC connection between QUIC Host X and QUIC Host Y in {{fig-arch}}, while other readers will be thinking of QUIC Host Y as some sort of (explicit) transport proxy or tunnel endpoint, e.g. {{I-D.bonaventure-quic-atsss-overview}}. This document is only focused on the multiple paths between QUIC Host X and QUIC Host Y, in order to talk about classes of sending and strategies for sending over multiple paths. However, it might be that further implications arose from the motivation of end-to-end multipath or intermediary multipath. In particular the latter will additionally require, according to {{I-D.bonaventure-quic-atsss-overview}}, QUIC datagram (unreliable transport) and tunneling support. While multipath traffic distribution strategies play a central role in multipath transport, multipath re-ordering strategies become additionally important for multipath over unreliable network protocols. Possible strategies to solve this are described in {{I-D.amend-iccrg-multipath-reordering}}. Another complexitiy, not in scope of this document, is the interaction between multipath scheduling and QUIC stream traffic scheduling.

## Sending When Multiple Paths Are Available {#sending}

This section uses  terminology from 3GPP ATSSS {Access Traffic Steering, Switch and Splitting, {{TS23501}}) to describe three different classes of packet sending that could be used when multiple disjoint paths are available. Note that these terms describe concepts that are not ATSSS-specific, and could apply to any multipath environment. If terminology more accessible to IETF QUIC working group participants presents itself, I'll change it.

Please note that the relationship between "flows", "packets", and "datagrams" isn't entirely clear yet. In {{TS23501}}, a "flow" is defined as "a set of packets that share an ordering constraint", which maps reasonably well onto TCP bytestreams and correspondingly onto MP-TCP bytestreams, but the core QUIC transport mechanism {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} provides multiple bytesteams in a single connection, and leveraging QUIC streams seems to be a use case enabler, whether for redundantly sending overlapping ranges, for efficiently striping non-overlapping ranges for bandwidth, or for strict ordering.

Further, with the QUIC datagram extension {{I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}}, DATAGRAM frames can be carried in a QUIC connection, but are not part of a stream and do not interact with in-order delivery within a stream. 

### Traffic Steering

When a sending host has a new "flow", and has more than one path available, a sending host will select a path to begin sending packets on. This can be described as Traffic Steering.

Note that the selection of a path is "per-flow". Different flows may be steered onto different paths, but each flow will be sent on a single path. 

The choice of a path can be based on a number of factors - for instance, whether the path will be used for bulk transfer, or whether an unmetered path is available. Those factors are important, but for this document, the point is that a path is selected. 

### Traffic Switching

When a sending host has more than one path available and is sending a flow  on a single path, the sending host can stop using this path for this flow, and start using another path. This can be described as Traffic Switching. 

Note that the selection of another path is also per-flow. A sender can switch a flow onto a different path, without switching any other flows to that path. 

### Traffic Splitting

When a sending host has more than one path available, the sending host may wish to use multiple paths simultaneously for a single flow. This can be described as Traffic Splitting. 

Note that splitting a flow onto multiple paths means that the sending decision would be made on a packet-by-packet basis. No guarantee of packet ordering across paths is assumed. 

Note that splitting a flow onto multiple paths, packet by packet, means that any ordering constraint must be provided by an upper layer metchanism. In {{TS23501}}, Multipath TCP {{RFC8684}} is used to provide that ordering constraint. 

### Traffic Steering, Traffic Switching, and Traffic Splitting in the Core QUIC Transport Protocol and Datagram Extension

{{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} and related specifications support the selection and use of multiple paths for a connection between QUIC endpoints, as long as only one path is in active use at any given time. {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} and related specifications do not support sending traffic for a single connection on multiple paths between QUIC endpoints simultaneously. 

This level of support for multipath allows Traffic Steering - the selection of a specific path - and Traffic Switching - migration of traffic from one path to another, using QUIC connection migration. It does not allow "Traffic Splitting" - the use of simultaneous paths for a single connection.

One important output from the QUIC interim meeting was the recognition that some participants view "Traffic Switching" as something like "protection switching" from an active path to a standby path, that doesn't happen often, while other participants view QUIC connection migration as a way of responding frequently to changing path conditions. This will be an important part of the conversation about multipath QUIC. 

If a QUIC endpoint opens and validates two or more connections, no additional setup or signaling is required for a sender to switch paths - that can begin with the next packet queued for transmission. This would allow "Traffic Splitting" for unordered QUIC DATAGRAMs {{I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}}, with an upper-layer mechanism providing flow ordering if that is needed. 

## Sending Strategies with Multiple Paths {#strategies}

During the QUIC virtual interim meeting, various presenters described various sending strategies that they have used in the past (especially with TCP {{RFC0793}} and Multipath TCP {{RFC8684}}). and that they expected to use in the future with some multipath QUIC extension. 

This section is an attempt to identify commonalities and gaps that may inform work on future multipath extensions for QUIC. 

All of these sending strategies build on Traffic Steering - opening one or more connections for a new flow, and then proceeding to use one connection, switch to another connection, or split traffic across paths. For this reason, Traffic Steering isn't mentioned in the rest of this section. 

### Active-Standby

The traffic associated with a specific flow will be sent via a specific path (the 'active path') and switched to another path (called 'standby path') when the active access is unavailable. Traffic Switching is sufficient to support this strategy. {{Alibaba-MPQUIC}} and {{Multipath-3GPP-ATSSS}} mentioned this strategy at the QUIC Interim meeting.

### Trading Latency Versus Bandwidth

Some applications require low latency, and others don't. So using a network path with lower latency for some connections, and using a different network path with higher bandwidth available for others. allows this strategy. Traffic Switching is sufficient for this, if measured path characteristics change enough to justify changing paths. {{Chromium-Multipath}} mentioned this strategy at the QUIC Interim Meeting. {{Apple-Multipath}} is actually switching paths at sub-RTT rates.

### Bandwidth Aggregation/Load Balancing 

Some environments allow the use of multiple paths simultaneously for significant periods of time, because none of the paths are metered, so using all of the bandwidth on all of the paths simultaneously makes sense for bulk transfers. Traffic Splitting is required to support this strategy. {{Alibaba-MPQUIC}}, {{Hybrid-Access-Multipath}}, {{Sat-Terr-Multipath}}, and {{Multipath-3GPP-ATSSS}} all mentioned this strategy at the QUIC Interim Meeting. {{I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers}} mentions this strategy as "Round-Robin" (not recommended) and "Weighted Round-Robin".  

### Round-Trip-Time Thresholds, Minimum RTT Difference, and RTT Equivalence

Not all multipath environments include paths with significant differences between path characteristics, but several do. 

A sender might select the first available path with a smoothed round-trip-time below a certain threshold.  The goal is to keep the RTT of the multipath connection to a small value and avoid having the whole connection impacted by "bad" paths. {{I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers}} mentions this strategy as "Round-Trip-Time Threshold". 

A sender might select the path with the lowest RTT among all available paths, in order to minimize latency for latency-sensitive flows. {{I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers}} mentions this strategy as "Lowest Round-Trip-Time First". 

If two or more paths have characteristics that are "sufficiently close" - for example, they may have path RTTs that are equivalent, from the application's point of view - a sender may wish to use both paths as long as that's the case, and then adopt another sending strategy when measured path characteristics diverge. Traffic Splitting is required to support this strategy. {{Apple-Multipath}}, {{Sat-Terr-Multipath}}.{{Hybrid-Access-Multipath}}, and {{Multipath-3GPP-ATSSS}} all mentioned this strategy at the QUIC Interim Meeting.

### Priority-based

Paths are assigned priority levels that indicate which path will be used first. Concretely, the traffic associated with the matching flow will be steered on the path with a high priority till congestion is detected, then the overflow will be sent over a low priority access. Traffic Splitting is required to support this strategy. {{Multipath-3GPP-ATSSS}} mentioned this strategy at the QUIC Interim meeting. 

### Redundant

Traffic is replicated over two or more paths to increase the probability that the traffic will arrive at the other host undamaged and usable. Redundant traffic may be used for all packets in a connection, or may only be used when measured network conditions indicate it should be used. Traffic Splitting is required to support this strategy. {{Apple-Multipath}} and {{Multipath-3GPP-ATSSS}} mentioned this strategy at the QUIC Interim meeting. 

### Combinations of Strategies

As {{I-D.bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers}} points out, a scheduler can use a combination of strategies in sending decisions. For example, a scheduler might use load-balancing over three paths, but when one of the paths becomes unavailable, might switch to the two paths that are still available. 

# IANA Considerations

This document does not make any request to IANA.

# Security Considerations

QUIC-specific security considerations are discussed in Section 21 of {{I-D.ietf-quic-transport}}. 

Section 6 of {{I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}} discusses security considerations specific to the use of the Unreliable Datagram Extension to QUIC.

Some multipath QUIC-specific security considerations can be found in Section 8 of the individual draft {{I-D.deconinck-quic-multipath}}. 

# Acknowledgements

I'd like to thank Lars Eggert and Lucas Pardue, the QUIC working group chairs, who called the QUIC virtual interim meeting on multipath.

I'd also like to thank the presenters at the QUIC virtual interim, who put together valuable presentations on short notice. 

Thanks to David Allan, for comments resulting in the clarification of Traffic Steering, Traffic Switching, and Traffic Splitting when these concepts are used in contexts outside 3GPP. 

Thanks again to Lucas, for providing comments resulting in several clarifications on the mapping of Traffic Splitting onto QUIC protocol operation. 

Thanks to Markus Amend, for providing contributions and spotting a whopper of a typo!

Many thanks to (your name could easily appear here) for reviews and comments. 

# Document History

(Note to RFC Editor - if this document ever reaches you, please remove this section)

Version -00: initial submission

Version -01: updated for IETF 109 QUIC working group session

Version -02: Updated to add details about end-to-end and tunneling usages